[music plays]
1.5
My name is Mala, and I'm from London.
I'm known as a producer, an engineer, label owner, a promoter
in what people nowadays consider to be Dubstep.
One of the reasons why I've been invited here today is because John Peel was one of the first
well, actually was the first person
to play my music, as well as my peers' music
on what we consider to be mainstream radio.
So for us back in 2003/2004, even now, it's a huge deal
because we are coming from a very underground background with a very underground mentality.
And I still operate in that way today
You know I still cut dub plates as I did many many years ago.
And the reason I like to cut my music to the dubplate
and why I still manufacture vinyl when I sell my records is
because I think it is the optimum way that my music should be heard.
I've managed to pick a good handful of records from what seems to be an impossible task.
That whole soundsystem culture that we learnt form you know
the Jungle pioneers, they obviously took from what they were growing up listening too.
And a lot of that soundsystem culture was your Jah Shaka
was Aba Shanti-I.
It was UK soundsystem and Jamaican soundsystem culture.
So, I got a few sevens.
Honestly the amount of time I had was nowhere near enough to even scratch the surface
to be honest with you.
Personally, for me and Augustus Pablo, I'll just take this whole section and dump it in the box.
For me, what I loved about Augustus Pablo
is there was a real freedom in the music when he plays
and not that I try to recreate his sound or style of music
just hearing that freedom when I started creating music
really encouraged me to not worry about any rules.
I'll better just pick a couple I guess.
This particular song 'East of the River Nile', is one of the first songs I played to my son
after he was born, I think it was about nine days after he was born.
When you first have your first child
and your child cries longer than like three minutes straight
you think whats going on, is there a problem?
And I remember he wouldn't stop crying.
And I remember putting on some Augustus Pablo for him and it really just
you know straight away easing up.
This is a very special record to me.
And I know to my family as well.
A really great record and a very strong and profound intro speech that is given.
41.1
'When we trod this line we walk for one reason'
41.2
'The reason is to try to help another man to think for himself'
41.3
'The music of our heart is roots music'
41.4
'Music which recalls history'
41.5
'Because without the knowledge of history you cannot determine your destiny'
41.6
'The music about the present'
41.7
'Because if you're not conscious of the present
41.8
you're like a cabbage in this society'
41.9
'Music which tells about the future
41.93
and the judgement which is to come'
4.96
'The music of our art is roots presenting Misty in Roots'
4.99
[music plays]
(John Peel) We usually play two or three reggae records in every programme
but I'd like to play more really.
Cause I really like it a lot
and it's what I play when I'm stuck in here answering letters feeling sorry for myself.
Now if you ask me what it is I like about this album by Misty, I honestly couldn't tell you.
I think it's actually very spiritual music, and you can dance to it
well, I could if it wasn't for the war wounds
but y'know, I don't like to talk about them too much.
I can't remember how much I paid for my copy of this record.
Such a good album, It's definitely one of my all time favourite albums.
Listened to it so many times over the years.
Maybe this kind of somehow ties in with this, going into another period of time for me.
This is The Ragga Twins y'know
I think The Ragga Twins deserve much respect and credit for their contribution to Jungle music.
It was these guys that were bringing their vibe and their sound and energy to those breakbeats
that in my opinion started shaping and forming that whole genre
and that whole style of the MC on the beat.
Jungle music for me was the central point, cause from Jungle music
you could find elements of rare groove, elements of hip hop, elements of Dub, Reggae and Roots
of Techno, and of Hardcore.
For me personally like 93/94, for me those two years
I don't think there's any other music made like that, ever.
I guess from an outsiders point of view it was that transition from it being like
that hardcore thing, where I guess it was more unified as an underground movement.
I dont know because I wasn't part of that movement, just from my outside perspective
and being a kid as well.
But then, you know, 93/94 you started getting this separation
Hardcore was going one way, and Jungle was going another way
and me and my people, we were just straight up Junglists.
Classic track, Maxi, Tom and Jerry, incredible record for those that know.
For those that don't know, you'll know after this for sure.
At school, we used to record the radio sessions at the weekend
from like Kool FM or Energy FM or Dream FM.
Also you'd have people that would go to the record shops and buy the tape packs
like A.W.O.L. tape packs and stuff.
What you'd do, you'd go to school on Monday
and you'd trade them for sandwiches and that.
There was one guy whose mum just made the best sandwiches
so he was the guy that had the best tapes.
Awh man, this tune here.
This tune here man, this is one of my favourites.
Hardleaders - Souljah, Fade 2 Black, haven't heard this for a long time.
I once was at Metalheadz, and I heard Peshay do a mix of this and a track called Acid Track.
Metalheadz was, I guess a movement really
it was more than just a label, it was more than just a dance y'know
it was a whole sound, it was a whole mentality, a whole approach.
It was set up by Goldie, and we used to go to Metalheadz from like 96 onwards.
We'd be the first in the queue, last one out
when they were pulling the plug, that's when we would leave.
But we absolutely loved the whole Metalheadz vibration.
As I was saying, Peshay was playing there one time, played this tune man.
Aw man, the mix was so cold.
It was so cold that he reloaded both the tunes at the same time
and he did the mix again.
I'll never forget that moment, incredible.
This is a very big record for me.
Have to big up, you know Roots Manuva.
Massively inspirational, you know
growing up listening to his music, especially knowing he was from Brixton.
You know, ten minutes down the road from where we at.
I remember seeing Roots Manuva play at Brixton Academy, many many years ago.
And you know, when he played Witness
and seeing everybody in Brixton Academy kinda fists up, you know what I mean.
It was a real powerful moment man, especially for like a local bredda you know.
People want music maybe for more entertainment purposes, maybe mainstream, it kind of like leans towards that.
Whereas something like this, it isn't necessarily gonna be played on mainstream radio
unless someone like John Peel would have played it
because he's not really coming with the entertainment, he's coming with the real talk.
Being educated in Jungle and Drum and Bass
all those guys used to cut dubplates.
All those guys had exclusive tunes that only they had you know what I mean.
How I went about developing my sound wasn't conscious in the sense
oh there’s a gap in the market, let's try and fill it with this.
Its like everything was accelerating, so everything was getting faster.
Everything was about big build ups and big drops you know.
And for me it was like, when I was going home after a days work, and making music
it really was like a kind of meditation
and I guess thats where that kind of ‘meditate on bass weight’ comes into it
because we never thought we was making dance music, so to speak.
So, we've got some Digital Mystikz stuff in here.
Oh right, this is our first record that we released
me and Coki on Big Apple records.
I wouldn't usually select one of my own records to go in a box
I find that quite a strange thing to do but because it's not just me
there's also Coki on there
I'm putting this record in the box, to big up my brother Coki.
I think we made these tracks in 2003
and the record shop closed down quite shortly after that.
And that's the reason why we set up our own record label
because you know we just had done the record
but we had, you know an entire back catalogue on our harddrives of music
we'd been making already for a couple of years.
This is really interesting to find in there
because it's the first DMZ record, DMZ001.
And it features my press release, which isn't a press release
‘cause I never used to do press releases, I couldn't stand them.
It just has an email here that I sent, and it's on the 2nd April 2004 at one in the morning.
It says Easy Hermeet, who was producer assistant to John
It was real good to link you last night
I thought fwd>> was banging too
Fwd>> was a place that still goes on now which has dance
It used to be at Plastic People in Shoreditch on Curtain Road.
Fwd>> was just like the hub for all of us man.
That was the place where tunes would get made there and tunes would break there too you know.
Before we started DMZ.
It was forward thinking music, that's how it was perceived. It didn't have a ‘genre title’ as such.
People just went there and you knew that you weren't gonna hear that music
anywhere else in the world.
Because only that guy had it you know.
We used to cut dubplates especially for Hatcha
until we started playing ourselves.
Unfortunately I had to say to Hatch, 'I gotta keep some of the dubs for myself'.
All I know is I think I got a random message saying:
John really loves your music and he's been playing it on the show
and anything you wanna send us, please do.
So I just started sending music.
And also, I think still to this day, John Peel was the only person to
play one of our records that was unreleased on mainstream radio.
So I used to send him kind of exclusive dubplates, and they got played.
When I sent some of my records to him, I'd lost my job and I was looking for work
and he must have mentioned it on the radio like:
'Good luck Mala looking for your new job you know'.
So it was that kind of like little personal things that he would push out there to people
kind of directly and maybe indirectly.
Which I think is a really special thing when you have millions of people
but you make those millions feel like you're actually just talking to them one.
I'll put this one in
you know I've gotta put Skream and Benga track again.
a very big record you know for the movement at the time.
Just in general like, I think what a lot of people used to hear about what we were doing back then
it really was a community of producers and artists that were likeminded
that genuinely wanted to see each other move forward and make great music.
So when you hear a record like this
you'd just go home and you'd just be inspired to just make music and see how far you can take it.
For us, it's not necessarily like oh we're doing something new, I never really felt that.
For me it was just, this is just a continuation of what it is that I love
and that's my interpretation of it.
Nobody had any fear to be who they wanted to be and express that to the fullest.
And if there's anything that we have in life, it is a freedom of expression.
If I'm gonna compromise that - you must be joking.
Because as I say, it's one of the only freedoms that I feel we truly have.
So yeah.